ForewordHindutva and Dalits, a collection of sixteen thoughtful chapters, was 
first published in 2005, under the shadow of the Gujarat massacres of 
2002. Its purpose was a searing one: to probe why subaltern and 

marginalized Dalits and Adivasis joined in violent attacks against a 

vulnerable minority community, instead of making common cause 

against them as a rainbow coalition of threatened people. More than 

a decade later, in the wake of the second NDA government being 

sworn in, the collection has gained in relevance. The editorial 

introduction tracks the changes that have occurred in the intervening 

years and it also historicizes the DalitŒHindutva relationship.  Some of the chapters trace the history and the ideological apparatus 
of Hindutva forces. Others study, in close detail, the emergence of an 

unlikely alliance between Dalits and Hindutva power in places as 

different as Maharashtra, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, 

Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Karnataka and Kerala. In the process, we get a 

richly textured analysis of Hindutva mobilization tactics, strategic 

calculations and flexibility. We also see the varied forms of Dalit 

politics and movements: Ambedkarite and Periyarite radical social 

revolutionism, accommodation with Congress politics in its KHAM 

(KshatriyaŒHarijanŒAdivasiŒMuslim) phase, the upsurge and decline 

of Dalit Panther militancy, autonomous Dalit electoral parties and an 

embrace of the Hindutva agenda at different points of time. There is 

no linearity in the process. Instead, different stories have unfolded at 

different paces at different points of time. Some situations promise a 

relatively hopeful Dalit response to HindutvaŠas in Tamil Nadu, for 

instanceŠand answers are sought in its historical and political 

specificities. Some seek to establish intersecting forms of subordination: 

as Dalit women face and resist upper caste and Hindutva backlash, 

for instance. Some focus on Hindutva and bring out startling evidence 

of blatant casteism in the writings of its leading ideologues. Others 

look closely at how Hindutva operatives have worked and grown 

among Dalits and Adivasis in a Left-dominated region like Kerala. 

Many seek to correlate the rise of Hindutva politics to the spread of 
x Tanika Sarkarneoliberal reforms in interesting ways. Most essays also reflect on how 
political parties opposed to the BJP have failed to provide an alternative 

organizational and ideological drive that could have countered it.The essays, therefore, cover a vast and complex area of Indian 
politics and history. In varied ways, and from different sites, they 

collectively ask a critical question. Why and how do Dalits and 

Adivasis endorse a politics that is certain to pose threats to themselves? 

That question is key to understanding hegemony in general; and 

Hindutva™s hegemonic agenda in particular: where subalterns 
 develop a stake in their own subordination and accept the ruling 

ideology of the dominant forcesŠnot in resignation or despair but in 

eager self-identification with it. In the Indian case, Sanskritization and upward mobility through 
communal violence, as well as the erosion of working class cross-

community solidarities and shared workplaces under neoliberal 

assaults on large industries, are some of the important answers. 
 There are incisive accounts of growing internal stratification among 

Dalits which leads the upper stratum to make common cause with 

Hindutva and to distance themselves from progressive social move
-
ments. The book provides a strong sense of how the Hindutva agenda 

actually offers little of substance to Dalits. It certainly never sought 

structural transformation in their social and material deprivation, 
 nor led movements against their cultural stigmatization. Yet, through 

a policy of symbolic incorporation within the Hindu community, it 

has emerged as a strong political option among some Dalit leaders 

and ideologues. In the 1990s, when Hindutva first became a mass movement on a 
national scale, the great secular hope was that the growing democra
-tization of the Indian electoral systemŠwhere for the first time, 

subaltern castes came to prominence on their ownŠwould help stem 

the tide of communal politics. Forces released by the Mandal 

Commission recommendations, and the agitations around it, would 

stop the advance of Mandir-based mass mobilization. Two decades 

on, the hope seems a forlorn one. Yet, not entirely so, as recent years have definitely registered a new 
Dalit upsurge, albeit in circumstances of intense repression and danger, 

it is quite clear that there are other movements afoot too, among 

DalitsŠwhom Anand Teltumde has called foot soldiers of Hindutva. 

Intellectuals and subalterns alike have turned repeatedly against 

Muslims during riots while OBCŒDalit contradictions have emerged 
Foreword xiwith great force. Muslims, Dalits and Adivasis have signally failed 
 to make common cause against communal violence, and against 
neoliberal depredations.The great strength of this collection is that it asks difficult questions 
and does not provide easy answers. It registers and analyses, with a 

wealth of empirical data and serious reflection, the strength of 

Hindutva ideological mobilization, its utilization of the neoliberal 

economic context to its own advantage. It also critically examines 

Dalit foot soldiers of Hindutva and processes of cooptation not only 

into Hindu nationalism, but also into its most violent manifestation. Tanika SarkarRetired Professor of History Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi